
###Reinventing the Wheel 101###

Why is "reinventing the wheel" so bad? Because  apparently some people long before you had a godly intelligence to create something that is beyond redesign! You, as a "senior developer" should just use your mind as a bucket of others' ideas and concoct solutions based on those. The more you learn, the more your bucket enlarges so you will ultimatly reach a level of no "wheel reinvention" and finally achieved ultimate "seniorship". Sounds like a mindless religion? Sure is! The end result of this mindset is:

- overly complicated code. Chances are nobody made a solution PRECISELY for your needs, so you end up using something that is needlessly complex, which taxes performance as well as making code hard to understand. In the world of Java or PHP (the other languages I'm competent at) you encounter a profusion of frameworks geared at making above-mentioned bucket enormous enough to fit "everything" a coder will ever possibly need. 
- abominable code made by programmers who never got their chance to exercise their mind. Obviously, years or even decades of experience while working like a factory robot doesn't increase your intelligence and problem-solving skills. The things you write will always reflect the lack of fundamental logic: zero concern on performance, simplicity, elegance or even common sense. Typically here we find classes doing EVERYTHING, technologies used because developer could not write two lines of proper code, orgies of pre-processor macros (in C/C++) and an omnious messy look from top to bottom.
- the standards. Factory work would not be complete without standards. A worker is supposed to obey standards as his second nature! Generally the standards have themselves become standardized, so companies have created tools that check if your code obeys the standards (be it test coverage, code quality, design patterns or whatever). The end result gives the impression of a quality improvement, but real life experience tells you they are to a large extent useless hindrance. Hiring a few competent developers is always a better long term solution (in terms of quality & performance) than imposing standards to sub-standard workers.
- WARNING: this may hurt feelings! Because programming is a well-payed job, it has lately attracted an army of people unsuitable for this job, incapable to do any better EVEN IF they are trained "the standards" or to think for themselves.

Are all of above responsable for the steady decline in the quality of programming? You bet! What is the alternative then? The alternative is to "reinvent the wheel" whenever you can think you can do better, learn from your/others' mistakes and move your level ever higher while maintaining rock-solid allegiance to above-mentioned principles of performance, simplicity and elegance. Why only these three abstract ideas I qualify as standards? Because they define a working methodology that imposes no constraints except striving for clarity and perfection. This way programming becomes an ungoing quest to intellectual discovery and delight! 